The Elements: A Very Short Introduction (Very Short Introductions)
Chapter 2Revolution: How oxygen changed the world
It is often said that Antoine Laurent Lavoisier did for chemistry what Isaac Newton did for physics and Charles Darwin for biology. He transformed it from a collection of disparate facts into a science with unified principles.
But timing is crucial. Newton’s work in the seventeenth century signals the beginning of the Enlightenment, the confidence in rationalism as a way both to understand the universe and to improve the human condition. Darwin’s theories began to take hold as the solid certainties of nineteenth-century science and culture gave way before the giddy perspectives of modernism; all the old rules of art, music, and literature were changing at the same time.
And Lavoisier? His was the fate of the Enlightenment’s brave new world: slaughtered during Robespierre’s Reign of Terror. The liberal optimism of philosophers and thinkers like Voltaire, Montesquieu, and Condorcet foundered before the fickle passions and arbitrary brutality of the French Revolutionaries. Reason was overthrown, and, in the decades that followed, chemistry became the supremely Romantic science.
Lavoisier (1743–94), like Condorcet, was misfortunate that the leading thinkers in France were likely, sooner or later, to become embroiled in politics. Whereas in England science was still the pursuit of ‘gentlemen’ with money and leisure to spare, France had its state-approved Academy of Sciences whose members commonly filled public offices and became highly visible figures in political life (Fig. 2).
Lavoisier was a tax collector before he became a famous scientist, and that was largely what sealed his fate. But his chemical expertise also secured him the prominent position of director on Louis XVI’s Gunpowder Administration, and as treasurer and effective secretary of the Academy of Sciences he vigorously opposed its dissolution by the anti-elitist Jacobin administration in 1793. Lavoisier was a sitting target for the Revolutionary witch-hunters, who were determined to purge the nation of anyone whose loyalty to the Republic they found reason to doubt. That is why, in 1794, Lavoisier was forced to bow his head to the blade that had just removed his father-in-law’s.
Two centuries later, the debate still rages about whether Lavoisier was or was not the true discoverer of one of chemistry’s most important elements: oxygen. It has become the subject of a play written by two of the world’s leading chemists, the Nobel laureate Roald Hoffmann and the co-inventor of the contraceptive pill, Carl Djerassi. In Oxygen, the Nobel Committee of 2001 has decided to award ‘retro-Nobel’ prizes for great discoveries made before the prize was inaugurated in 1901. They decide that the first chemistry prize must go to oxygen’s discoverer, because, says one of the characters, ‘the Chemical Revolution came from oxygen’. Lavoisier gave the element its name, but he was certainly not the first to make it, nor to recognize it as a distinct and important substance. The Nobel Committee argues furiously over the leading three candidates, while a fictional encounter between them in 1777 reveals new insights into their own struggles to secure priority.
Yet that is only part of the tale. Oxygen provides not only the central organizing principle for modern chemistry but a bridge between the new and the old, between the alchemical roots of Robert Boyle’s ‘chymistry’ and the syntheses of endless wonders in today’s chemical plants. In joining the two, it marks a crucial stage in the developing concept of an element.
2. Antoine Laurent Lavoisier (1743–94), the ‘Newton of chemistry’, and his wife and sometime assistant Marie Anne Lavoisier
Something in the air
Lavoisier delivered two shocks to the Aristotelian elements. His experiments on water led him to conclude in 1783 that it ‘is not a simple substance at all, not properly called an element, as had always been thought’. And, concerning that other fluid element of antiquity, he announced that ‘atmospheric air is composed of two elastic fluids of different and opposite qualities’, which he called ‘mephitic air’ and ‘highly respirable air’. Neither water nor air, in other words, is an element.
He named the constituents of water hydrogen (‘water-former’) and oxygen, which combine in a two-to-one ratio reflected in the familiar chemical formula H2O. Air is a more complex substance. The fraction that is ‘highly respirable air’, Lavoisier realized, is an element in itself: oxygen. The name comes from the Greek for ‘acidformer’, as Lavoisier wrongly believed that oxygen was a component of all acids. For the ‘fluid’ that Lavoisier called mephitic air he proposed the name azot or azotic gas, a Greek term indicating that it is inimical to life. Lavoisier found that, when he isolated this component, it had the ‘quality of killing such animals as are forced to breathe it’. Reasonably enough, he concluded that it was noxious. In fact it is not poisonous but simply useless: separated from oxygen, it cannot sustain life. Lavoisier noted that this gas ‘is proved to form a part of the nitric acid, which gives a good reason to have called it nitrigen’. He preferred his azot, however, and so did the other French chemists – which is why nitrogen is known to this day as azote in France.
Lavoisier was not intent on wholly demolishing tradition, however, vouching that: ‘We have not pretended to make any alteration upon such terms as are sanctified by ancient custom; and therefore . . . retain the word air, to express that collection of elastic fluids which composes our atmosphere.’
His assessment of this ‘collection of fluids’ was somewhat incomplete, although understandably so. Oxygen and nitrogen between them account for 99 per cent of air; but the remainder is a fantastic blend. Mostly it is argon (see page 154), an extremely unreactive element. There is a small, variable proportion of water vapour (enough to condense into clouds and raindrops when air is cooled), and about 0.08 per cent of air is carbon dioxide. Other trace gases include methane, nitrous oxide, carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide, and ozone. Until the past few decades, many of the minor constituents of air went undetected. But, despite their low concentrations, they play a crucial role in atmospheric and environmental chemistry. Some are greenhouse gases, warming the planet. Others are toxic pollutants. Some have natural sources; others are solely human made; many are both. To understand the properties and behaviour of the atmosphere, chemists commonly now have to take into account reactions involving dozens or even hundreds of trace gases and their offspring.
Oxygen and nitrogen are elements, but most of these other gases are compounds formed by the reaction and joining together of two or more different elements. In oxygen gas, each atom of oxygen is bound to another atom of oxygen. In carbon monoxide, an oxygen atom is linked to an atom of carbon.
Somewhat confusingly, when chemists use the term ‘element’, they can thus be referring either to a specific kind of atom – oxygen in rust or water is still an element in this sense – or to a physical substance containing only one kind of atom, like oxygen gas or a piece of ruddy copper metal. Some elements, including most metals, are usually found naturally in compounds, in which their atoms are linked to those of other elements. Other elements occur naturally in a pure or ‘elemental’ form, like sulphur or gold. It is not dissimilar to saying that a cat is both an abstract thing with distinguishing properties – pointed ears, a tail, a tendency to purr and chase mice – and the very real, warm ginger creature that sits at our hearth.
So air is (mostly) oxygen and nitrogen; water is oxygen and hydrogen. But the elements that constitute air do not form the same kind of mixture as those in water. Chemical bonds link each atom of oxygen to two atoms of hydrogen in water, and only a chemical reaction will separate them. In air, the two elements are just mixed physically, like grains of sand and salt. They can be separated without a chemical reaction. In practice, Lavoisier found it necessary to use a chemical reaction to perform the separation: he allowed the oxygen to combine with other substances through combustion, leaving behind almost pure nitrogen. But modern techniques can perform the physical separation of these elements.
Oxygen’s shadow
Lavoisier’s conclusion about air was not new. Just as he was not the first to make water from its component elements, neither could he lay claim to the priority for deducing that air contains two dissimilar substances. What was special about Lavoisier’s claim was not the observation but the interpretation.
The second half of the eighteenth century was the age of ‘pneumatick chemistry’, when the properties of gases, typically called ‘airs’, were the focus of the discipline. The invention of the pneumatic trough, a device for collecting gases emanating from heated substances, by the English clergyman Stephen Hales in the early part of the century, was pivotal for bringing about this emphasis. Whereas in antiquity ‘air’ implied anything gaseous, Hales’s apparatus allowed chemists to appreciate that not all such ‘emanations’ were alike, and so could not justifiably be regarded as the same unadulterated element.
There was, for example, the ‘fixed air’ studied by Scottish chemist Joseph Black (1728–99). In the 1750s, Black found that a gas was produced when carbonate salts were heated or treated with acid. The air, he reasoned, was ‘fixed’ in the solids until liberated. Unlike common air, fixed air turned lime water (a solution of calcium hydroxide) cloudy. We now recognize that this is due to the formation of insoluble calcium carbonate – basically chalk. Black found that human breath, the gases given off during combustion, and the gaseous product of fermentation, all have the same effect on lime water. This fixed air is carbon dioxide, into which carbonates decompose when heated.
Black’s student Daniel Rutherford (1749–1819) called this gas ‘mephitic air’ instead: mephitis is a noxious emission in legend, thought to emanate from the earth and cause pestilence. It seemed an apt name, for animals died in an atmosphere of this new gas. Rutherford’s ‘air’ is not, however, the same as Lavoisier’s mephitic air, which is nitrogen. Yet Rutherford is himself credited with discovering nitrogen, for he found that it is an unreactive component of common air. Only about a fifth of common air is ‘good’, supporting life, Rutherford reported in 1772. If this good air is consumed in some way, that which remains extinguishes candles and suffocates mice. Two other English pneumatick chemists, Henry Cavendish (1731–1810) and Joseph Priestley (1733–1804), made the same observations in the 1760s; indeed, similar results date back to the time of Robert Boyle. But Black was the first (marginally) to advance the notion that nitrogen, as it later became known, was a separate element.
Joseph Priestley’s experiments with Hales’s trough were phenomenally fertile. He isolated around twenty different airs, including hydrogen chloride, nitric oxide, and ammonia. But neither he nor any of his contemporaries regarded these substances initially as distinct compounds in their own right. The legacy of Aristotle’s elements was still strong, and the pneumatick chemists preferred to regard each gas as ‘common air’ altered in some manner – for example, in states of greater or lesser impurity. Even Lavoisier found this a hard habit to shake off.
This prejudice reflected more than an allegiance to classical ideas, however. The pneumatick chemists had a theory to explain the chemical reactions of gases, which they moulded to fit every new observation. It invoked chemistry’s most notorious pseudoelement: phlogiston.
Alchemy mutated into modern chemistry in several stages, and the phlogiston theory was arguably the last of them. We can trace this hypothetical substance back to Jabir ibn Hayyan’s sulphur, a supposed component of all metals. Real sulphur, the yellow solid mined from the earth, was a combustible substance, a component of gunpowder and the brimstone that bubbles beneath the fires of hell. So it is understandable how the alchemical sulphur of the three Paracelsian ‘principles’ became Johann Becher’s terra pinguis: fatty earth, the oily principle of combustibility. Becher’s disciple Georg Ernst Stahl (1660–1734) gave it a new name: phlogiston, from the Greek word for ‘to burn’.
To some chemists phlogiston was fire itself: a form of the ancient element. Others, accepting the blurring of the demarcation between ‘elements’ and alchemical ‘principles’, concurred with Becher’s definition of terra pinguis: ‘Metals contain an inflammable principle which by the action of fire goes off into the air.’
It seems reasonable enough to assume from the flames and smoke dancing above a burning log that the wood is releasing some substance into the air. This, then, was phlogiston, the essence of flammability. You want proof? Burn a candle flame in a sealed container. The flame dies out eventually, said phlogistonists, because the air has become saturated with phlogiston given off by the candle and can receive no more.
Metals do not generally burn with a bright flame, but when they are heated in air they can be converted into new, dull substances. This process was called calcination in the eighteenth century, and the products were calxes. If a calx is heated in the presence of charcoal, the metal is recovered. It was assumed that metals too give out phlogiston during calcination. Charcoal was deemed to be rich in phlogiston (why else would it burn so well in ovens and furnaces?), and so it was capable of restoring this substance to the calx, regenerating the metal.
There is just one problem. It is true that wood, losing mass as it burns, seems to be giving out some substance into the air. But calcined metals gain weight. How can they get heavier by losing phlogiston? Most chemists ducked the issue; some asserted that phlogiston was weightless, or even that it had negative weight or the ability to convey buoyancy.
Stahl’s phlogiston theory was elaborated to explain not just combustion but many other processes, including biological ones. It accounted for acids and alkalis, for respiration and the smells of plants. It was a chemical theory that, if not all embracing, at least gave the discipline an impressive unity.
In 1772 Lavoisier was still a believer in the phlogistonic orthodoxy. But he had begun to doubt that this was all there was to combustion. He proposed towards the end of that year that metals take up (‘fix’) air when calcined, and that the calx releases this fixed air when ‘reduced’ back to metals with the agency of charcoal and heat. Hearing of Black’s fixed air in 1773, he decided that this was what metals combine with to form a calx. That at least explained the gain in weight. It also weakened the need to invoke phlogiston at all.
Then a French pharmacist named Pierre Bayen pointed out to Lavoisier that ‘calx of mercury’, which we would now call mercuric oxide, can be converted to mercury simply by heating, without the need for ‘phlogiston-rich’ charcoal. Moreover, the gas released in this process was not Black’s fixed air, but something quite different. What was this gas? That started to become clear to Lavoisier when Joseph Priestley came to dinner.
Priestley, a nonconformist Presbyterian minister, was supported in his scientific studies by the patronage of the Earl of Shelburne, in whose house Priestley was tutor. In August 1774 Priestley conducted the same experiment as Bayen, heating mercuric oxide and collecting the gaseous product. He found that a candle flame placed in this gas burned even more brightly than in common air, and that a lump of smouldering charcoal became incandescent. In this ‘air’, combustion thrived.
Obviously, thought Priestley, the ‘air’ was peculiarly lacking in phlogiston, and was therefore especially avid to soak it up from burning substances. Priestley never swayed from his firm conviction in the phlogiston theory as long as he lived, and he called his new gas ‘dephlogisticated air’.
In 1775 Priestley discovered it had an even more miraculous property. Mice placed in a glass vessel full of ‘dephlogisticated air’ survived for much longer than mice in an identical vessel containing common air. There was something vital about this substance, and, when Priestley himself inhaled it, he reported that ‘my breath felt peculiarly light and easy for some time afterward’. He envisaged that it might become used as a health-enhancing substance, although ‘hitherto only my mice and myself have had the privilege of breathing it’.
Here Priestley may have been mistaken, for in 1674 Robert Boyle’s assistant John Mayow (1641–79) asserted that a gas released by heating nitre (potassium nitrate) turned arterial blood red in the lungs. Mayow asserted that metals gained weight during calcination because of the uptake of particles of this ‘nitro-aerial’ gas (which was, of course, nothing other than oxygen). And in 1771–2 a Swedish apothecary named Carl Wilhelm Scheele, one of the finest experimental chemists of his age, performed the same experiment as Mayow and isolated a gas that enhanced burning. He supposed that this flammable component of common air, which he called ‘fire air’, combined with phlogiston during burning.
So Priestley’s dephlogisticated air had a hidden past. Scheele’s work was still unknown in 1775, since the apothecary did not announce his findings (which included the fact that ‘fire air’ comprised one-fifth of common air) until 1777.
Priestley and Shelburne dined with Lavoisier in Paris in October 1774, and Priestley mentioned his findings at the table. Together with Bayen’s results, this persuaded Lavoisier that metals were not after all combining with ‘fixed air’ to form calxes. Bayen reported only that the gas released from mercuric oxide was like common air; and in March 1775 Lavoisier announced that his own experiments with mercuric oxide revealed all calxes to be a combination of metals with such a gas.
Seeing this report, Priestley realized that Lavoisier had not quite appreciated the ‘superior’ qualities of his ‘dephlogisticated air’ – it was not merely common air. He sent the Frenchman a sample of the gas to verify that this was so. As a result, Lavoisier presented a paper to the French Academy in April in which he identified the principle of combustion – Priestley’s gas – as an especially ‘pure air’. In keeping with his notorious arrogance, he made no mention of the contributions of Priestley and Bayen.
Priestley, Lavoisier, and Scheele feature in the play Oxygen as the three contenders for the discovery of oxygen. Scheele’s part in the real drama was not quite so isolated as it might appear. His account of the discovery was sent to the publishers in 1775, but took two years to appear in print. More significantly, Scheele sent a letter to Lavoisier in September 1774 outlining his findings. The fate of the letter is not known; but in Oxygen it becomes a central part of the plot.
Lavoisier may have been cavalier with his treatment of priority issues, but he went far beyond replicating the results of others. To Priestley, oxygen was always going to be regarded as a form of common air modified by the removal of phlogiston; Scheele too saw things very much in these terms. Lavoisier came to understand that this ‘pure air’ was actually a substance in its own right. In that case, air itself was not elemental but a mixture. It is Lavoisier who made oxygen an element.
The chronology of events suggests that oxygen arose purely from attempts to explain combustion. But Lavoisier was equally keen to make this new element the explanatory principle of acidity, itself still a profound mystery to chemists. In this he was less successful. Many non-metallic elements, such as sulphur, carbon, and phosphorus, combine with oxygen to produce gases that dissolve in water to make acids, and that is why Lavoisier named the new element as he did (in German oxygen is still known as Sauerstoff, ‘acid stuff’). But not all acids contain oxygen; and those that do, do not derive their acidity from it.
Lavoisier’s belief reveals that he still held a somewhat traditional view of elements. They were generally regarded as being rather like colours or spices, having intrinsic properties that remain evident in a mixture. But this is not so. A single element can exhibit very different characteristics depending on what it is combined with. Chlorine is a corrosive, poisonous gas; combined with sodium in table salt, it is completely harmless. Carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen are the stuff of life, but carbon monoxide and cyanide (a combination of carbon and nitrogen) are deadly. This was a hard notion for chemists to accept. Lavoisier himself came under attack for claiming that water was composed of oxygen and hydrogen: for water puts out fires (it is ‘the most powerful antiphlogistic we possess’, according to one critic), whereas hydrogen is hideously flammable.
The discovery of oxygen did not just make phlogiston redundant; the two were fundamentally incompatible. Oxygen is the very opposite of phlogiston. It is consumed during burning, not expelled. Burning ends when the air is devoid of oxygen, not when it is saturated with phlogiston. Indeed, it is this mirror-image quality that made phlogiston seem to work so well. Science needed an element like this to explain combustion – but it simply looked at the problem the wrong way round. Phlogiston was oxygen’s shadow.
But Lavoisier rejected it only in stages. At first he simply avoided mentioning it. Not until 1785 was he prepared to issue a formal denunciation. When it came, however, it was harsh:
Chemists have made phlogiston a vague principle, which is not strictly defined and which consequently fits all the explanations demanded of it. Sometimes it has weight, sometimes it has not; sometimes it is free fire, sometimes it is fire combined with an earth; sometimes it passes through the pores of vessels, sometimes they are impenetrable to it. It explains at once causticity and non-causticity, transparency and opacity, colour and the absence of colours. It is a veritable Proteus that changes its form every instant!
Yet even Lavoisier could not quite relinquish everything that phlogiston stood for. Like many of his contemporaries, he regarded heat as a physical substance, rather like the ancient elemental fire. He called it caloric, and it sounded suspiciously like phlogiston in another guise. Caloric was what made substances gaseous; oxygen gas was replete with it. When oxygen reacted with metals to form calxes, caloric was released (heat was given out), and in consequence the oxygen became dense and heavy.
These ideas are evident in an essay of Lavoisier’s from 1773, in which he identifies the three different physical states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas. Here he makes the crucial distinction between the physical and chemical nature of substances, which confused the ancients and led to their minimal elemental schemes. ‘The same body’, says Lavoisier, ‘can pass successively through each of these states, and in order to make this phenomenon occur it is necessary only to combine it with a greater or lesser quantity of the matter of fire.’
Belief in a kind of elemental fire (even with a fancy new name) is not the only remnant of the classical past in Lavoisier’s view of the elements. He retained the notion that true elements are ubiquitous, or are at least components of very many substances:
it is not enough for a substance to be simple, indivisible, or at least undecomposed for us to call it an element. It is also necessary for it to be abundantly distributed in nature and to enter as an essential and constituent principle in the composition of a great number of bodies.
Despite these throwbacks, Lavoisier transformed the way chemists thought about elements. At the beginning of the eighteenth century it was common to imagine just five of them. In 1789 Lavoisier consolidated his oxygen theory by publishing a textbook, Traité élémentaire de chimie (An Elementary Treatise on Chemistry), that defined an element as any substance that could not be split into simpler components by chemical reactions. And he listed no fewer than thirty-three of them. It would require nineteenth-century physics to show that some of these were fictitious (light, caloric). Several others were in fact compounds that chemists had not yet found how to decompose to their elements. But the message was clear: there is no ‘simple’ scheme of elements. There are lots of them out there, and it was up to chemists to find them.
Signs of life
Scientists have recently gained their first glimpse of a planet outside our solar system. The first ‘extrasolar’ planet was detected in 1996 by the wobble that it transmits to its mother star as it circulates in orbit. But in 1999 astronomers were able to detect the light reflected from such a planet. It was slightly blue.
Sadly, this does not mean the planet is like Earth; the blue tint probably comes from other gases in the planet’s atmosphere. But what if one day scientists find a planet whose reflected light contains the telltale fingerprint of oxygen, as does that of our own world? Then it will be hard to conclude other than that the planet harbours life.
This seems a big leap: why does oxygen imply life? Until the 1960s, scientists tended to believe that the Earth’s oxygen-rich atmosphere – it is roughly one-fifth oxygen and four-fifths nitrogen – was a ‘given’, a result of geological processes on the early Earth. According to this picture, a planet with an oxygen blanket could support life but does not necessarily do so.
Now they see things very differently. The chemical composition of the air is not a precondition for life but the result of it. Around two billion years ago, primitive living organisms transformed the atmosphere from one largely devoid of oxygen to one with plenty of it.
There is no known geological process that can maintain a high level of oxygen in our planet’s atmosphere. Eventually the gas will react with rocks and become locked away in the ground. Only biological processes can strip oxygen out of its combinations with other elements and return it to the skies. If all life on Earth were to end, the oxygen level would gradually dwindle to insignificance. For this reason, an oxygen-rich atmosphere is a beacon that proclaims the presence of life beneath it.
All animals rely on oxygen, but there is nothing very surprising about organisms that do not. Many bacteria are anaerobic: they do not consume oxygen, and indeed are averse to it. These organisms thrive in the mud of the seabed and of marshlands, in deep oilfields, and many other places where air does not penetrate.
When life began, over 3.8 billion years ago, the first cells were anaerobic. The atmosphere at that time was probably a mixture of nitrogen with gases such as carbon monoxide and water vapour, or perhaps methane. Like any other organisms, these primitive bacteria needed some source of energy to drive their biochemical processes, and some researchers believe they may have at first found this source in the heat and chemical energy of undersea volcanoes.
But there is a more widespread and abundant energy source: sunlight. At some stage in early evolution, life discovered how to harness the sun’s rays through photosynthesis. The light energy is used to split apart carbon dioxide and synthesize the carbon-based molecules of life. A by-product of the photosynthetic reactions of most organisms is oxygen. For millions of years this gas was soaked up by other substances, such as iron that was dissolved in the seas. But eventually these ‘oxygen sinks’ were all used up and and oxygen began to accumulate in the atmosphere.
To us this sounds fortuitous, but to photosynthetic cells it was the biggest outbreak of global pollution the world has ever seen. To them oxygen was sheer poison. It is perceived as a friendly element, but it is actually one of the most corrosive and destructive. Oxygen’s urge to engage in chemical reactions is excelled by only a very few other elements.
After all, it takes only a single spark to persuade an entire forest to react with oxygen. The consequence in 1998–9 was a haze of smoke that covered Indonesia and altered the local climate. There is geological evidence for global wildfires in the distant past that make this one seem like a bonfire.
St Matthew warns that there are no treasures on Earth but that ‘moth and rust doth corrupt’ – for there was until recently no way to protect gleaming iron and steel from the avid combining power of oxygen. It turns old paintings brown as it transforms the varnish; exposed to air, most metals develop a rind of oxide within seconds.
Nature, however, makes do. If the air is full of poison, it will learn to live on poison. We breathe oxygen not because it is inherently good for us but because we have evolved ways of making it less bad for us. Enzymes mop up the deadly compounds formed as oxygen is used to burn sugar in the energy factories of our cells. These compounds include hydrogen peroxide, used as an industrial and a domestic bleach, and the even more destructive superoxide free radical. Such substances damage the delicate biomolecules of our cells, including DNA. Cells have molecular mechanisms that strive to repair the damage, but its inevitable accumulation is an important factor in the ageing process.
Thus there is nothing optimal or ideal about living on an oxygen-rich planet; it is simply the way things turned out. Oxygen is, after all, an extremely abundant element: the third most abundant in the universe, and the most abundant (47 per cent of the total) in the Earth’s crust. On the other hand, the living world (the biosphere) has contrived to maintain the proportion of oxygen in the atmosphere at more or less the perfect level for aerobic (oxygen-breathing) organisms like us. If there was less than 17 per cent oxygen in the air, we would be asphyxiated. If there was more than 25 per cent, all organic matter would be highly flammable: it would combust at the slightest provocation, and wildfires would be uncontrollable. A concentration of 35 per cent oxygen would have been enough to destroy most life on Earth in global fires in the past. (NASA switched to using normal air rather than pure oxygen in their spacecrafts for this reason, after the tragic and fatal conflagration during the first Apollo tests in 1967.) So the current proportion of 21 per cent achieves a good compromise.
This constancy of the oxygen concentration in air lends support to the hypothesis that the biological and geological systems of the Earth conspire to adjust the atmosphere and environment so that they are well suited to sustain life – the so-called Gaia hypothesis. Oxygen levels have fluctuated since the air became oxygen rich, but not by much. In addition, today’s proportion of atmospheric oxygen is large enough to support the formation of the ozone layer in the stratosphere, which protects life from the worst of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet rays. Ozone is a UV-absorbing form of pure oxygen in which the atoms are joined not in pairs, as in oxygen gas, but in triplets.
How is atmospheric oxygen kept at such a steady level? It is created, as we have seen, during photosynthesis, when organisms strip oxygen from water molecules. Photosynthetic organisms include all plants and many species of bacteria. Oxygen is consumed by animals and other aerobic organisms. It is tempting to regard the steady level of oxygen as a balance between these sources and sinks in the biosphere. But there is more to it than that. The oceans act as a kind of buffer against large variations in atmospheric oxygen, since the decomposition of marine organic matter (which removes oxygen from the air) slows down if oxygen levels fall.
Oxygen is one of several vital elements that are constantly consumed and recycled by processes involving the biosphere, the Earth’s rocks and volcanoes, and the oceans. These so-called biogeochemical cycles are linked: changes in the cycling of oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus are interdependent. The meshed cogs create a more or less constant environment on our planet. Changes to the turning speed of one of the cogs – for example, owing to industrial and agricultural practices that pump carbon-rich gases into the atmosphere – can upset the other cogs in ways that are hard to predict. This is why there is so much uncertainty about the likely course of global climate change caused by human activities.
Because the biogeochemical cogs are always turning, the chemistry of the Earth is not at equilibrium. When a chemical process reaches equilibrium, all change ceases. The chemical constancy of our planet’s environment is due not to inactivity but to perpetual change. It is the difference between a person staying on the same spot by standing still or by walking a treadmill.
This disequilibrium of the Earth’s environment involves inorganic processes in sea and rock, but it is ultimately sustained by the biosphere – by life. The cogs are kept in motion mostly by the energy of the sunlight captured by photosynthetic organisms. If life ceased, the planet would gradually settle towards a static equilibrium that would be very different from today’s environment.
We can see this by looking at the atmospheres of our neighbouring planets. Venus and Mars are of a similar size to Earth, and they were formed from a roughly similar mixture of elements. But their skies now contain only tiny amounts of oxygen – less than 1 per cent – and only small quantities of nitrogen. Their atmospheres are both about 95 per cent carbon dioxide, even though that of Mars is very tenuous while that of Venus is very thick. On Venus this dense blanket of the greenhouse gas raises surface temperatures to around 750 °C; on Mars the thin sheet keeps things at a frigid –50 °C or so. In either case, the absence of oxygen and the proximity of the mixture of atmospheric gases to an equilibrium mixture proclaims from afar that there is no life to be found on these worlds.