Lessons for the Young Economists
LESSON 2
How We Develop Economic Principles
In this lesson you will learn:
The difference between a purposeful action versus mindless behavior.
The difference between a social science and a natural science.
Why the methods used to develop basic economics are different from those used in physics or chemistry.
Purposeful Action versus Mindless Behavior
When we look at the world and try to make some sense of it, one of the most basic and crucial distinctions we all make—usually without even realizing it—is the difference between purposeful action versus mindless behavior. When describing the trajectory of a baseball, we might mention things like mass, velocity, and air friction. We don’t say that the baseball “wants to move in a parabola,” or that the ball “gets bored with flying and eventually decides to land.” This would be nonsense talk to modern ears, and would strike us as very unscientific. But suppose that instead of a baseball, we are describing the motions of a jet aircraft. In that case, we would have no problem saying that the pilot “wants to avoid the turbulence” or that he “is running low on fuel and decides to land.”
This difference in how we describe the two events reflects a fundamental decision we make when interpreting the world around us. When we observe events, we can either attribute them to natural laws, or we can explain them (at least in part) by reference to the intentions of a conscious being. In short, we can choose whether to believe that another mind is at work.
We are here touching on some very deep philosophical questions, and obviously we are not going to give you “the final word” in this short lesson. But in order to make sense of economic theory, to give it a solid foundation, we need to be aware of the distinction between purposeful action versus mindless behavior. The laws of economics apply to the former, not to the latter. As we will see in Lesson 3, economics always involves the operation of at least one mind, meaning an intelligence that has conscious goals and will take steps to influence the material world in order to achieve those goals.
The difference between purposeful action versus mindless behavior is not simply the difference between human beings and “inanimate” matter. Various movements of a human being’s physical body can be examples of mindless behavior, too. For example, if I tell you, “I’ll give you $20 if you raise your right leg,” then we would interpret your subsequent behavior as an intentional response, where you purposely moved your leg because you wanted the money. But if your doctor whacks your right knee with a hammer to test your reflexes, the resulting movement in your leg would not be an example of purposeful action. Although your nervous system and brain were involved, we wouldn’t really say that your mind was involved. (Note that brain and mind are very different things, and that difference is crucial to this lesson.)
The lessons in this book apply to purposeful actions performed by conscious people who have goals in mind. Sometimes the boundary line between what is “conscious action” and “reflexive behavior” can be blurry, but that won’t really detract from the principles in this book. It’s true, a baseball outfielder might not be fully aware of the mental operations he performs when throwing the ball to second base. But he is very definitely trying to throw out the runner, because he wants his team to win the game. Even if he “miscalculates” and overthrows the base, all the lessons in this book apply to his intentional action, because he is a conscious being trying to exchange one situation for a different one that he thinks will be more desirable.
The economic principles in this book are not confined to “perfectly rational people.” The lessons in these pages apply to real people who use their minds to make exchanges in the real world every day.
The Social versus the Natural Sciences
Economics is a “social science,” meaning that it studies people and aspects of society. Other social sciences include psychology, sociology, and anthropology. The natural sciences, on the other hand, study aspects of the natural world. The natural sciences include physics, chemistry, biology, astronomy, and meteorology.
Because of their different subject matter, the social sciences focus on purposeful action, as described in the preceding section, while the natural sciences focus on mindless behavior. Even though he might not even be aware that he is doing it, the social scientist’s explanations and theories at least implicitly rely on the hypothesis that there are other minds at work, influencing events. In sharp contrast, with the notable exception of biology, the natural scientist typically doesn’t refer to a conscious intelligence when explaining events in his field of expertise.
This awareness of other minds, and the fact that other thinking humans have their individual motivations, pervades the social sciences. It’s not confined to the formation of theories to explain events, either: Even the raw “facts” of the social sciences are themselves mental things, and not purely natural or physical. For example, a sociologist might come up with a theory relating an increase in the crime rate with the increase in the rate of divorce. But in order for the sociologist to even collect data to test this theory, she needs to “get inside other people’s minds” in order to know which events should be classified as crimes and divorces in the first place; these are not mere brute facts of nature.
Even the “Facts” of the Social Sciences Are Related to the Mind
Take such things as tools, food, medicine, weapons, words, sentences, communications, and acts of production.... I believe these to be fair samples of the kind of objects of human activity which constantly occur in the social sciences. It is easily seen that all these concepts... refer not to some objective properties possessed by the things, or which the observer can find out about them, but to views which some other person holds about the things. These objects cannot even be defined in physical terms, because there is no single physical property which any one member of a class must possess.... [T]hey can be defined only by indicating relations between three terms: a purpose, somebody who holds that purpose, and an object which that person thinks to be a suitable means for that purpose.
—Friedrich A. Hayek, Individualism and Economic Order (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948), pp. 59–60
For example, if Sally runs her car over Joe and he dies, this may or may not count as a homicide. If Sally had a heart attack five seconds before the crash, it was probably not a crime, but rather just an accident. On the other hand, if the cops arrive at the scene to hear Sally yelling, “That’s the last time you’ll cheat on me!” then it’s time to read Sally her rights. Notice that ultimately it is Sally’s mind that makes the difference; the sociologist needs to make guesses about what Sally consciously intended in order to know if a crime occurred. No amount of physical description per se can decide the matter, except insofar as the description sheds light on what Sally was thinking when the car struck Joe. Her mental will has the power to transform a regular car into a murder weapon. To stress the point one last time: Nothing physical changes in the composition of the car during this transformation; the physicist and chemist wouldn’t notice anything happening to the molecules forming the car. On the contrary, when we say that Sally “turned the vehicle into a murder weapon,” we are rendering a judgment concerning the intangible, directly unobservable state of Sally’s mind. The physical movements of Sally’s hands and feet as she controlled the car are not the crucial issue; it is her conscious intentions that determine whether we need to add one more homicide to the running total.
As the example of Sally hitting Joe with her car illustrates, even the “raw facts” of the social sciences are tinged with our understanding of other people’s minds. In contrast, typically in the natural sciences neither the raw facts, nor the theories developed to explain them, rely on an appreciation of the intentions of other thinking beings. The natural scientist can look out upon the physical world and try to come up with explanations of its “mindless” behavior.
The Success of the Natural Sciences versus the Social Sciences
There is a sharp difference between sciences such as physics, chemistry, and biology on the one hand, versus sciences such as psychology, sociology, and anthropology on the other. People refer to the former as “hard” and the latter as “soft,” and—especially among the hard scientists!—there is a general feeling that the so-called hard sciences are more rigorous and indeed “scientific” than the so-called soft sciences. Generally speaking, the smartest and most celebrated scientists in the world are found in the hard sciences; besides the obvious icon of Einstein, the physicists Richard Feynman and Stephen Hawking have also captured the popular imagination. In contrast, it is not nearly as prestigious to win awards in psychology, and few people could even name the top sociologists of the last century. While some people might condemn the particular physicists who helped create atomic weapons, even so the overwhelming majority support physics itself. Yet in another sharp contrast, many people are skeptical and even hostile to some of the social sciences, particularly economics and psychiatry.
What is going on here? If we hadn’t known the answer already, we might have expected things to be the reverse, where public opinion revered the scientists who studied people and not mindless particles.
One possible answer is that the social sciences have justified some pretty awful things, such as electroshock therapy for people incarcerated against their will, and the government-sponsored slaughter of millions of pigs during the Great Depression while Americans starved. So maybe these types of episodes are the reason many people distrust psychiatrists and economists. But again, why don’t people also tend to blame physicists for Hiroshima, or the chemists for gunpowder?
We suggest the reason is that the physics and chemistry behind powerful weapons are right. The physicists said to the military, “If you drop this object from an airplane, it will induce a fission reaction that will release an incredible amount of heat.” And the physicists were perfectly accurate in their predictions. In sharp contrast, the psychiatrists told the courts, “Give us authority to imprison people we think are mentally ill, and allow us to inject them with drugs and perform other experiments on them. This will make them well, and yield a society with adjusted people who do not exhibit aberrant, anti-social behavior.” Many of the supposedly top-notch economists too told governments during the 20th and 21st centuries: “Give us control of the printing press, and we will spare the world any more ravaging depressions and rampant price inflation.” Obviously, the track record of the psychiatrists and most influential economists is not nearly as laudable as that of the natural scientists.
For some reason, it seems that even the most accomplished geniuses in the social sciences can lead their disciplines down dead-ends, where more and more of the experts in the field (as well as the general public) begin to suspect that the “state of the art” is a waste of time. Many people would agree that “psychiatry was doing all right... until Sigmund Freud,” or that, “Economics took a major wrong turn when John Maynard Keynes came on the scene.” Yet almost nobody would say, “Isaac Newton did a lot of great work in physics, until that nutjob Einstein came along and ruined it.”
One important reason for this gulf between the success and prestige of the natural sciences on the one hand, versus the mediocre results and hostility to the social sciences on the other, is that the objects of study in the natural sciences are fairly simple, and their behavior seems to be governed by a concise set of rules. Consequently, the hard sciences can (typically) rely on controlled experiments to evaluate their theories. This is why it’s much less likely that physics will go down a cul-de-sac the way many people think Freudian psychology or Keynesian economics did. Physical theories make predictions about objects in the material world. It would be very difficult for a newfangled yet ultimately inferior theory to sweep the profession in a hard science (such as physics), because its inferiority would be demonstrated repeatedly in experiments. Einstein famously resisted some of the philosophical implications of quantum theory but no physicist (including him) could argue with the accuracy of the theory’s predictions about experimental measurements made on subatomic particles.
Since subatomic particles don’t (as far as we know) have minds, in order to understand their behavior—in order to “explain” subatomic particles—a theory in physics can’t be asked to do anything more than to predict, with greater and greater precision and accuracy, what these particles will do in various circumstances. Now we should point out that in actual practice, things are not so simple in day-to-day physics. One theory may yield better predictions in a few experiments, while another theory may be simpler and more elegant. Some physicists may “believe in” the more elegant theory, and search for possible flaws in the experiments that cast doubts on their preferred theory. Even so, in the long run a theory in the hard sciences that systematically and unambiguously yields better predictions will eventually displace its rivals.
Most professionals in the social sciences think that the same method—the “scientific method”—should be used in their fields as well. However, the problem is that, quite literally, the objects of their study have minds of their own. It has proved fiendishly difficult to come up with a set of concise laws that accurately predict the behavior of people in various circumstances. In the social sciences, especially economics, things are so much more complicated that in many cases it is simply impossible to perform a truly controlled experiment.
To illustrate this important difference between the natural sciences and economics, first suppose two groups of physicists are arguing about the strength of the electric charge on a certain particle. After conducting an experiment using a clever new technique, one group in Australia announces that the previous estimate needs to be revised. However, the rival group of physicists argues that the Australian experiment is flawed, because the laboratory’s proximity to the South Pole distorted the measurements. They settle the dispute by conducting the same experiment at several different latitudes, to see if the measured results move closer to the previous estimate as the laboratory gets closer to the equator. The crucial assumptions behind all of this research are that the underlying laws governing the particles are the same, and that the experimenters can hold every other (relevant) factor constant while isolating the effects of the magnetic charge emanating from the earth’s poles. The story we just told gives an idea of why physics seems to “work” so well; there really is good reason to suppose that over the years, the physicists will develop theories with greater and greater accuracy in predicting how the physical world works.
Things are not nearly as straightforward when two groups of economists argue over rival theories. For example, one group of economists—the Keynesians—believe that the Great Depression was caused by a collapse in “aggregate demand,” and that President Herbert Hoover and then Franklin D. Roosevelt should have pushed through massive government deficits—spending borrowed money—to counteract the slump. A different group of economists—the Austrians—disagree strongly, and instead think that the initial crash in 1929 was caused by a preceding “boom” engineered by the Federal Reserve, which is the U.S. central bank established by the government. According to the Austrians, Hoover and Roosevelt made the Depression drag on for more than a decade with their misguided interventionist policies. The Austrians dispute the Keynesian deficit theory, pointing out that Hoover and FDR ran what were at the time record high (peacetime) budget deficits during their administrations, which coincided with the slowest and most agonizing recovery in U.S. economic history. The Keynesians counter that, large as the deficits were, the government “obviously” didn’t borrow and spend enough, as proved by the lingering unemployment.
At this early stage of the book, we have not yet mastered the concepts to proceed further with this actual dispute. (In subsequent lessons, you will learn the tools you need to better appreciate the two sides of the argument.) For now, the point is that the dispute remains unresolved, even though professional economists have been arguing about the causes of the Great Depression for more than seventy years. The controversy won’t die, because the exact conditions of the world economy in the late 1920s were unique. Economists can’t test the Keynesian theory by, say, holding everything else constant except doubling the U.S. federal budget deficit in 1932, in order to observe the effect on the unemployment rate.
Federal Budget Deficits vs. Unemployment, 1930 – 1939
Sources: The American Presidency Project (http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/data/budget. php) and the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Economists Can’t Agree on the Right Medicine
[T]he proper injunction to government in a depression is cut the budget and leave the economy strictly alone.
–Austrian School economist Murray Rothbard
Just as we saved our way into depression, we must squander our way out of it.
–Business Week economist Virgil Jordan, writing in 1932
Quoted in Robert P. Murphy, The Politically Incorrect Guide to the Great Depression and the New Deal (Washington, D.C.: Regnery, 2009), pp. 52, 57
It is no doubt true that economists who, for moral or political reasons, endorse larger government spending, will tend to subscribe to the Keynesian arguments about the causes of the Great Depression. It is also true that opponents of “Big Government” will tend to be attracted to economic doctrines that stress the benefits of low taxation and slim government budgets. But it is the inability to perform controlled experiments that allows the persistence of such diametrically opposed economic theories, with both camps firmly convinced that they are right and their opponents are either dishonest or sloppy. These passions are on a much tighter leash in the hard natural sciences, because in those disciplines the facts “speak for themselves” to a much greater degree than in the social sciences.
Fortunately, all is not lost. Even though the methods of the natural sciences are of limited use in economics, there are other ways of discovering economic principles or laws, relying on techniques that are not available to the physicist or chemist. As you master the lessons in this book, you will gradually develop a new framework for interpreting the world. Things that seemed incoherent before will make perfect sense to you. And as you will see, the lessons in this book will not appeal to experimental or even historical results to prove their validity. Once you have grasped the essential points of each lesson, they will be yours forever. You may decide that the concepts are more or less useful to you, but you will never need worry that newly published economic research will render them false. How is this possible? We explain in the next section.
How We Develop Basic Economics
As we discussed above, economic theorists face two huge problems: the objects of their study have minds of their own and it is much harder to perform a controlled experiment in economics than in a natural science such as chemistry. These differences partly explain why the so-called hard sciences enjoy a much better reputation for objectivity and success than the soft sciences, including economics.
However, the economist does have one enormous advantage over the natural scientist: the economic theorist is himself a thinking being, with conscious goals. Because he has an insider’s view of acting in the economy, the economist can more easily understand the motivations and constraints faced by other actors in the economy. In contrast, the particle physicist doesn’t have any idea “what it’s like to be a quark,” and so the physicist must rely exclusively on the familiar empirical techniques to gain insight into the behavior of quarks.
Earlier in this lesson we focused on the important distinction between purposeful action versus mindless behavior, because this difference is key to developing useful economic principles. The economic principles we will develop in this book are all logical implications of the fact that there are other people with minds who try to achieve their own goals. In other words, if we as social scientists decide to commit to the “theory” that there are other minds operating in the world—just as each of us can directly experience his or her own mental awareness—then that “theory” starts spitting out other pieces of knowledge that are consequences of it. You will probably be surprised in Lesson 3 when we show just how much of economics is packed into the simple observation that, “John Doe is acting with a purpose in mind.” Right now we won’t list any of these results, because you should first understand exactly what it is you’ll be doing as you work through Lesson 3.
Rather than looking to physics or chemistry for guidance on how to develop good economic principles, a much better role model is geometry. In standard (i.e., “Euclidean”) geometry, we start with some basic definitions and assumptions that seem reasonable enough. For example, we define what we mean by a point and a line, we explain what we mean by the angle formed at the intersection of two lines, and so forth.
Once we have our starting definitions and assumptions in hand, we can use them to start building “theorems,” which is a fancy word for the logical deduction of the consequences of our original definitions and assumptions. A geometry textbook will start with the most basic theorems, and then use each new result to deduce something even more complicated. For example, early on a simple theorem may run like this: “If we start out with four lines that form a rectangle, then we can draw a new, fifth line that divides the rectangle into two identical triangles.” Once that (very simple) theorem is proved, it can be added to the toolbox, and subsequent, more difficult theorems can invoke this earlier theorem in one of their steps.
The procedure or method of geometry is quite similar to what we’ll do in this book to build up basic economic principles. In the next lesson we’ll define some concepts (such as profit and cost) and show their relation to our basic assumption that events in the social world are driven by purposeful actions. As we go through the lessons, we will continue to add new insights, by building on the previous lessons and by introducing new scenarios where we can apply our earlier results.
At this stage, there are two important observations you should make about the example of geometry First, notice that it doesn’t make sense to ask a mathematician to go out and “test” the theorems in a geometry textbook. For example, consider the Pythagorean Theorem, which is probably the most famous of all geometrical results. The Pythagorean Theorem says that if you have a triangle with a 90-degree angle, and you label each side with a letter, then the following equation will hold:
a2 + b2 = c2
Once you have seen an actual proof of the Pythagorean Theorem, you understand that it must be true. To amuse yourself, you can take a ruler and a compass (used to measure angles) and “test” the theorem out on triangles that you draw on a piece of paper. However, you’ll find that in practice the theorem won’t appear to be exactly true; you might find that the left-hand side of the equation adds up to 10.2 inches while the right-hand side comes out at 10.1 inches. Yet if you get such “falsifications” of the theorem, and point them out to a mathematician, he will explain that the triangle you were measuring did not really have an exactly 90-degree angle after all (maybe it was 89.9 degrees), and the ruler you used to measure the lines was an imprecise tool, since it only has so many notches on it and in practice you were “eyeballing” how long each line was to some extent. The important point is that the mathematician knows that the Pythagorean Theorem is true, because he can prove it using indisputable, step-by-step, logical deductions from the initial assumptions.
This is a good analogy for how we derive economic principles or laws. We start with some definitions and the assumption that there is a mind at work, and then we begin logically deducing further results. Once we have proved a particular economic principle or law, we can put it in our back pocket and use it in the future to help in proving a more difficult result. And if someone asks us whether the data “confirm or reject” our economic principle, we can respond that the question is nonsense. An apparent “falsification” of the economic law would really just mean that the initial assumptions weren’t satisfied. For example, we will learn in Lesson 11 the Law of Demand, which states that “other things equal, a rise in price will lead to a drop in the quantity demanded of a product or service.” Now if we try to “test” the Law of Demand, we will certainly be able to come up with historical episodes where the price of something rose, even though people bought more units of the good. This finding doesn’t blow up the Law of Demand; the economist simply concludes, “Well, ‘other things’ must not have been equal.”
We now move on to the second important observation you should take away from our discussion of geometry: Just because something is logically deduced from earlier definitions and assumptions (sometimes called axioms), the resulting proposition might still contain important and useful information about the real world. We stress this point because many people think that a field of study can be “scientific” and provide “information about the real world” only if its propositions can, at least in principle, be refuted by experiments or measurements. This requirement is obviously not fulfilled in the case of geometry, and yet everyone would agree that studying geometry is certainly useful. An engineer who sets out to build a bridge will have a much better shot if he has previously studied the logical, deductive proofs in a geometry class, even though (in a sense) all the theorems in the textbook are “merely” transformations of the information that was already contained in the initial assumptions.
The same is true (we hope!) for the economic principles and laws contained in this book. You will not need to go out and test the propositions to see if they’re true, because any apparent falsification would simply mean that the particular assumptions used in the proof were lacking at the time of the “test.” However, you will find that gaining this “armchair knowledge” through careful introspection and logical reasoning, will actually allow you to make sense of the real world in all its complexity. You will do much better navigating the economy, and making sense of its outcomes, once you have mastered the logical (yet un-testable) lessons in this book.
Lessons for the Young Economists
Lesson Recap...
A purposeful action is performed by a conscious being with a mind, who is trying to achieve a goal. Mindless behavior refers to motions in the physical world that are the result of “mere nature” and not the intentions of another thinking being.
The natural sciences include fields such as physics, chemistry, and meteorology. They study the natural world and try to deduce the “laws of nature.” The social sciences include such fields as sociology, psychology, and economics. They study different aspects of human behavior, including our interactions with each other in society.
The natural sciences develop theories that try to predict the behavior of mindless objects with better and better accuracy. They enjoy success because these objects seem to obey a constant set of fairly simple rules, and because in many settings they can perform controlled experiments. In the social sciences, including economics, the objects of study have minds of their own, and controlled experiments are much more difficult to perform. To develop economic principles, the economist relies on his own experience of purposeful action, and deduces the logical implications from it. In this respect economics is closer to geometry than to physics.
Lessons for the Young Economists
NEW TERMS
Purposeful action: An activity undertaken for a conscious reason; behavior that has a goal.
Keynesian economics: A school of thought (inspired by John Maynard Keynes) that prescribes government budget deficits as a way to lift the economy out of recession and restore full employment.
Budget deficit: The amount the government must borrow when it spends more than it collects in taxes and other sources of revenue.
Austrian economics: A school of thought (inspired by Carl Menger and others who happened to be Austrian) that blames recessions on government interference with the economy, and recommends tax and spending cuts to help the economy during a recession.
Logical deduction: A form of reasoning that starts from one or more axioms and moves step-by-step to reach a conclusion.
Axioms: The starting assumptions or foundations in a deductive system. For example, the method of constructing a straight line between two points could be an axiom in a geometry textbook. Axioms are not proved, but are assumed to be true in order to prove other, less obvious, statements.
Lessons for the Young Economists
STUDY QUESTIONS
If someone sneezes when pepper is thrown in his face, is that a purposeful action?
Does “purposeful action” include mistakes?
*Are brain and mind interchangeable terms?
Can we perform controlled experiments to test economic theories?
**Would you classify Intelligent Design theory as a natural or social science?